Doc: [WD-20812] Manage storage volumes (#15304)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/storage_volumes.md

In both commands, the default {ref}`storage volume type <storage-volume-types>` is `custom`, so you can leave out the `custom/` when displaying information about a custom storage volume.

````
```` {group-tab} UI

> To view available storage volumes in the UI, select {guilabel}`Volumes` from the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation.

Reviewer: Should this be reversed, first storage and then volumes?

> To view available storage volumes in the UI, from the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation, select {guilabel}`Volumes`..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To view available storage volumes in the UI, from the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation, select {guilabel}`Volumes`.
```

> To view available storage volumes in the UI, from the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation, select {guilabel}`Volumes`..

Reviewer: The cli section explains how to filter volumes by pool, the UI can do that as well, might be worth a note.

To create a custom volume with content type `block`, add the `--type` flag:

    lxc storage volume create my-pool vol2 --type=block
````
```` {group-tab} UI

> To create a custom storage volume, select {guilabel}`Volumes` from the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation.

Reviewer: The order is bamboozled. First storage, then volumes are to be clicked.

    lxc storage volume import my-pool <iso_path> vol4 --type=iso

````
```` {group-tab} UI

To create a custom storage volume, select {guilabel}`Volumes` from the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation.

On the resulting screen, click {guilabel}`Create volume` in the upper right corner.

> From this screen, you can configure the name, description and size of your storage volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this screen, you can configure the name and size of your storage volume.
```
I think we don't support the description for volumes in the UI.

You can select a content type from the {guilabel}`Content type` dropdown. Additional settings might appear, depending on the content type selected.

Click {guilabel}`Create` to create the storage pool.

```{figure} /images/storage/storage_volumes_create.png
:width: 80%

> :alt: Create a storage volume in LXD

Author: @edlerd opened [this pr](https://github.com/canonical/lxd-ui/pull/1176) to add CMS selection to storage volumes.

> :alt: Create a storage volume in LXD

Author: Will add a section describing storage volumes in clsutered environments.

Therefore, consider the file system's own overhead when setting limits.
Access to cached data is not affected by the limit.

````
```` {group-tab} UI
To attach a storage volume to an instance, navigate to the configuration page of the target instance.

> In the secondary menu, select {guilabel}`Disk` under {guilabel}`Devices`.

Reviewer: The Order of the gui labels should follow the path the user takes, first devices, then disk.

From here, select {guilabel}`Attach disk device`.

```{figure} /images/storage/storage_volumes_attach_to_instance_1.png
:width: 80%
:alt: Attach a storage volume to an instance - Disk configuration page
```

> The resulting modal will allow you to choose your disk type. To attach a new custom volume, select {guilabel}`Attach custom volume`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting modal will allow you to choose your disk type, select {guilabel}`Attach custom volume`.
```
This can be more concise. The label explains, probably no need to repeat it.

```{figure} /images/storage/storage_volumes_attach_to_instance_2.png
:width: 80%
:alt: Attach a storage volume to an instance - Attach disk device modal
```

Next, you can select a pre-existing volume to attach to the instance by clicking {guilabel}`Select`, or create a new custom volume by selecting {guilabel}`Create volume`.

```{figure} /images/storage/storage_volumes_attach_to_instance_3.png
:width: 80%
:alt: Attach a storage volume to an instance - Attach custom volume modal
```

Once the modal closes, you may need to add a Mount Point file path in the {guilabel}`Mount point` field.

> Finally, you can proceed to either save your instance changes, or create your instance by selecting {guilabel}`Create` (if you were in the instance creation process).

Reviewer: I think we should focus on instance edit. Then have a new sentence say, this is also possible in creation. The sentence structure here is mixing both information, making it hard to understand.

````
`````

(storage-volume-special)=

> ### Use the volume for backups or images

Reviewer: This is also possible in the UI: Under settings we can find the config value and change it, just like in the cli.

- Shrinking a storage volume with content type `block` is not possible.

```

````
```` {group-tab} UI

> To configure a custom storage volume, navigate to {guilabel}`Volumes` from the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation. From here, select your target storage volume.

Reviewer: clickpath is not aligned with the order of the labels.

Go to the {guilabel}`Configuration` tab. Here, you can configure settings such as the storage volume size. Further configuration options can be found in the secondary menu.
After making changes, click the {guilabel}`Save changes` button. This button also displays the number of changes you have made.

> Volume detail pages are only available for volumes of type Custom. Instance root disks can also be accessed from the Volumes page. To view storage volumes that are only of type Custom, whilst on the Volumes page, click {guilabel}`Content type` to filter by volume type.

Reviewer: The "Instance root disks can also be accessed from the Volumes page" is a bit confusing. Are there detail pages for only custom types or also for instnace root disks?

Author: I don't understand your comment, here. Please could you clarify how you would like me to proceed?

Author: To answer the question, only the custom types have Storage Volume detail pages, whilst the instance root disks link back to instance detail pages.

Reviewer: > To answer the question, only the custom types have Storage Volume detail pages, whilst the instance root disks link back to instance detail pages.

That is also my understanding. I think the sentence "To answer the question, only the custom types have Storage Volume detail pages, whilst the instance root disks link back to instance detail pages." implies there would be a volume detail page for instance root disks.

Author: I think I understand. Are you then suggesting that this sentence be removed entirely, or further clarified and generalised such as "Volumes of other types will redirect to their corresponding entity detail page" (Which addresses images / instances, etc etc...

Reviewer: "Volumes of other types will redirect to their corresponding entity detail page" this is not 100%, for images, there is no detail page, so we link to the instance list. Maybe best to stay with the instance root disk example, say it links to the instance detail page. Then only custom volumes have their volume detail page as might already be mentioned above.

Author: "Volume detail pages are only available for volumes of type Custom. Volumes of other types - such as Instance root disks - can also be accessed from the Volumes page and will redirect to their respective entity overview or list page." ? :)

Reviewer: Yes, that is much clearer, thanks :)

````
`````

## Create a storage volume in a cluster
For most storage drivers, custom storage volumes are not replicated across the cluster and exist only on the member for which they were created.
This behavior is different for remote storage pools (`ceph`, `cephfs` and `powerflex`), where volumes are available from any cluster member.

````` {tabs}
```` {group-tab} CLI

To add a custom storage volume on cluster member `member1`, add the `--target` flag:

    lxc storage volume create my-pool vol3 --target=member1

To create a custom storage volume of type `iso`, use `import` instead of `create`:

    lxc storage volume import my-pool <iso_path> vol4 --type=iso

````
```` {group-tab} UI

> To create a storage volume in a clustered environment, navigate to {guilabel}`Volumes` from the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation and click {guilabel}`Create volume` in the upper right corner.

Reviewer: clickpath should be aligned

- Shrinking a storage volume with content type `block` is not possible.

```

````
```` {group-tab} UI

To configure a custom storage volume, expand the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation and select {guilabel}`Volumes`. From here, select your target storage volume.

> Go to the {guilabel}`Configuration` tab. Here, you can configure settings such as the storage volume size. Further configuration options can be found in the secondary menu.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the {guilabel}`Configuration` tab, you can configure settings such as the storage volume size. Further configuration options can be found in the secondary menu.
```

After making changes, click the {guilabel}`Save changes` button. This button also displays the number of changes you have made.

> Volume detail pages are only available for volumes of type Custom. Volumes of other types - such as Instance root disks - can also be accessed from the Volumes page and will redirect to their respective entity overview or list page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Volume details pages are only available for volumes of type Custom. Volumes of other types—such as Instance root disks—can also be accessed from the Volumes page and redirect to their respective entity overview or list page.
```

> To view storage volumes that are only of type Custom, whilst on the Volumes page, click {guilabel}`Content type` to filter by volume type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To sort the Volumes table by type, you can click the {guilabel}`Content type` column header.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I suggest to add the above two paragraphs inside a Note annotation higher up, such as under the suggested sentence "Next, click the name of your target storage volume to view its details page." 

Note annotations are created like this:
````
```{note}
your note
```
````

````
`````

## Create a storage volume in a cluster

> For most storage drivers, custom storage volumes are not replicated across the cluster and exist only on the member for which they were created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

For most storage drivers, custom storage volumes are not replicated across the cluster and exist only on the member for which they were created.
```

> This behavior is different for remote storage pools (`ceph`, `cephfs` and `powerflex`), where volumes are available from any cluster member.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This behavior differs for remote storage pools (`ceph`, `cephfs` and `powerflex`), where volumes are available from any cluster member.
```

> ````` {tabs}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`````{tabs}
```

> ```` {group-tab} CLI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
````{group-tab} CLI
```

> To add a custom storage volume on cluster member `member1`, add the `--target` flag:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To add a custom storage volume on a cluster member, add the `--target` flag:
```

>     lxc storage volume create my-pool vol3 --target=member1

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```bash
lxc storage volume create <pool-name> <volume-name> --target=<member-name>
```

Example:
```bash
lxc storage volume create my-pool my-volume --target=my-member
```
````

Reviewer 2: Please use backticks for code blocks instead of indentation due to some strange behaviors from indentation in certain cases (like when following lists), as well as readability.

To create a custom storage volume of type `iso`, use `import` instead of `create`:

>     lxc storage volume import my-pool <iso_path> vol4 --type=iso

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```bash
lxc storage volume import <pool-name> <path-to-iso> <volume-name> --type=iso
```
````

````
```` {group-tab} UI

> To create a storage volume in a clustered environment, expand the {guilabel}`Storage` section of the main navigation and navigate to the {guilabel}`Volumes` page. On the volumes list page, click {guilabel}`Create volume` in the upper right corner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a storage volume in a clustered environment, select {guilabel}`Storage` > {guilabel}`Volumes` from the main navigation. On the Volumes page, click {guilabel}`Create volume` in the upper-right corner.
```

> On the volume creation page, you can configure the details of your storage volume, and select the Cluster member on which the storage volume will be based by selecting an appropriate cluster member from the {guilabel}`Cluster member` dropdown. This dropdown will only be available if the selected storage pool is cluster member specific.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the volume creation page, select the cluster member on which to base the storage volume from the {guilabel}`Cluster member` dropdown. This dropdown is only available if the storage pool selected for this volume is cluster-member specific, rather than shared across the cluster.
```

```{figure} /images/storage/storage_volumes_create_clustered.png
:width: 80%
:alt: Create a custom storage volume in a clustered environment
```

````

> `````

Reviewer 2: To find out more about clusters in LXD, see:

- {ref}`Clustering how-to guides <clustering>`
- {ref}`An explanation about clusters <exp-clusters>`
